Output Device

What Does Output Device Mean?
An output device is any hardware device used to send data from a computer to another device or user. 
Usually, most output peripherals are meant for human use, so they receive the processed data from the 
computer and transform it in the form of video, audio, or physical reproductions. 
Typical examples of output devices are monitors and projectors (video), headphones and speakers (audio), 
or printers and plotters (physical reproduction in the form of text or graphics).

Monitor
A monitor is an electronic output device that is also known as a video display terminal (VDT) or a video 
display unit (VDU). It is used to display images, text, video, and graphics information generated by a 
connected computer via a computer's video card. The first computer monitor was introduced on 1 March 
1973, which was part of the Xerox Alto computer system.
We all know monitor is an output device which provides graphical output. The create the graphical output 
the monitor uses two technologies
1. The technology which shows the images (Screen)
2. The technology which creates the images (CRT/TFT)

Screen
A screen might refer to the front end part of the monitor. It is the portion of a display device, on which the 
images the device produces appear. There are many types of display devices which have screens. These 
include TVs, tablets, and, yes, monitors. So a screen is something a monitor has, but screens are not exclusive 
to monitors. In addition to the screen itself, all these devices have additional internal components which they 
use to convert received information into visible pictures. 
The screen performance is measured according to the following main factors:
Screen Size, Aspect Ratio & Resolution

Display size
The size of a screen is usually described by the length of its 
diagonal, which is the distance between opposite corners, usually 
in inches. It is also sometimes called the physical image size to 
distinguish it from the "logical image size," which describes a 
screen's display resolution and is measured in pixels

Aspect Ratio
The aspect ratio of a display device is the proportional relationship between 
the width and the height of the display. It is expressed as two numbers 
separated by a colon (x:y). Common aspect ratios for displays, past and 
present, include 4:3, 16:10, 16:9, 21:6, and 32:9.

Resolution
Before understanding the resolution first let us understand a Pixel. where Pixel 
stands for "Picture Element." It is also known as "PEL." Pixel is the smallest element 
of an image displayed on a computer display, whether they are LCD or CRT 
monitors. A screen is made up of a matrix of thousands or millions of pixels. A pixel 
is represented with a dot or a square on a computer screen.
Resolution measures the number of pixels (individual 
points of color) in a digital image or display. It is defined 
as width by height, or W x H, where W is the number of 
horizontal pixels and H is the number of vertical pixels. 
For example, the resolution of an HDTV is 1920 x 1080.

Based on the technology used there are two types of monitors.
1. CRT Monitors
2. TFT Monitors
1. CTR Monitors

Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) is a computer display screen, used to 
display the output in a standard composite video signal. The 
working of CRT depends on the movement of an electron beam 
which moves back and forth across the back of the screen. The 
source of the electron beam is the electron gun; the gun is located 
in the narrow, cylindrical neck at the extreme rear of a CRT which 
produces a stream of electrons through thermionic emission. Usually, A CRT has a fluorescent screen to display 
the output signal.
The operation of a CRT monitor is very simple. A cathode-ray tube consists of one or more electron guns, 
possibly internal electrostatic deflection plates, and a phosphor target. CRT has three electron beams – one 
for each (Red, Green, and Blue) is clearly shown in the figure. The electron beam produces a tiny, bright visible 
spot when it strikes the phosphor-coated screen. In every monitor device, the entire front area of the tube is 
scanned repetitively and systematically in a fixed pattern called a raster. An image (raster) is displayed by 
scanning the electron beam across the screen. The phosphor’s targets are beginning to fade after a short time, 
the image needs to be refreshed continuously. Thus CRT produces the three color images which are primary 
colors. Here we used a 50 Hz rate to eliminate the flicker by refreshing the screen.

2. TFT Monitors
TFT displays or thin film transistor displays utilize simple chemical and 
electrical properties to create a visible image on a screen. Utilizing an 
electrical charge that causes the liquid crystals to change their 
molecular structure allowing various wavelengths of backlight to 
“pass-through”. The active matrix of the TFT display is in constant flux 
and changes or refreshes rapidly depending upon the incoming signal 
from the control device.
The TFT panel utilizes several layers of filters sandwiched between two glass panels. Two polarizer filters, color 
filters and two alignment layers determine exactly how much light is allowed to pass and which colors are 
created. The TFT layer controls light flow a color filter displays the color and a top layer houses your visible 
screen.
Standard TFT displays utilize a back-light of white bright light to generate the picture. Newer panels utilize LED 
or light emitting diodes to generate their light and therefore utilize less power and require less depth by 
design.

Monitor Cable, ports and connectors
A monitor port is a port used to establish the connection between the monitor and computer in order to 
display the computer's output.
The connection can be either analog or digital.
Most computers, laptops and other portable devices have built-in hardware, modules and monitor sockets 
to support monitor ports.
Each type of port has different characteristics and can support only video signals, or audio as well, with a 
wide range of different definitions.
Common Types of Monitor Ports

VGA Connector
VGA stands for Video Graphics Array. Video Graphics Array is a standard type of connection for video devices 
such as monitors and projectors.
The VGA connector is a three-row, 15-pin D-subminiature (D-Sub) 
connector referred to variously as DE-15. VGA is a popular display 
standard developed by IBM and introduced in 1987. It is a relatively 
old connection type now, but it still has its uses so don't be 
surprised if you run into one of these from time to time. It only 
supports video signals, with no audio. For a long time, it coexisted with DVI and DisplayPort interface 
connectors.

Digital visual interface (DVI)
Digital Visual Interface (DVI) is a video display interface developed by the Digital Display Working Group 
(DDWG). The digital interface is used to connect a video source, such as a video display controller, to a display 
device, such as a computer monitor. It was developed with the intention of creating an industry standard for 
the transfer of digital video content.
This interface is designed to transmit uncompressed digital video and can be configured to support multiple 
modes such as DVI-A (analog only), DVI-D (digital only) or DVI-I (digital and analog). Featuring support for 
analog connections, the DVI specification is compatible with the VGA interface.

DisplayPort (DP)
DisplayPort is a high-performance digital interface for 
transmitting audio and video signals. It was developed 
to replace older technologies, such as VGA and DVI, 
and has become one of the most advanced display 
technologies. You'll find the DisplayPort interface on 
desktop computers, laptops, notebooks, tablets, 
monitors and even some digital televisions.
High Definition Multi-Media Interface (HDMI)
The High-Definition Multimedia Interface, HDMI is an interface that is 
widely used for audio visual equipment for both domestic and 
professional applications. These are much better and clearer. They 
support standard, enhanced and high-definition videos, as well as 
multiple channel digital audio over a single cable.

Printer
A printer produces hard copies of the processed data. It enables the user, to print images, text or any other 
information onto the paper.
Based on the printing mechanism, the printers are of two types: Impact Printers and Non-impact Printers.

Impact Printer
The impact printer uses a hammer or print head to print the character or images 
onto the paper. The hammer or print head strikes or presses an ink ribbon against 
the paper to print characters and images.
The common types of non-impact printers are Dot Matrix Printer, Daisy Wheel 
Printer

Non-Impact Printer
Non-impact printers don't print characters or images by striking a print head or 
hammer on the ink ribbon placed against the paper. They print characters and 
images without direct physical contact between the paper and the printing 
machinery. 
The common types of non-impact printers are Laser printer and Inkjet printer
Printer Interfaces
Printers are connected to computers using a variety of different interfaces such as
Parallel Port, Serial Port, USB Port,IEEE 1394. Network capable printers also have a built-in network 
interface and are connected directly to a port on the network so they can be shared across many 
computers..

Parallel Port
A parallel printer interface is called (IEEE 1284). This port works by sending an 8-bit information stream to 
the printer. It uses a standard parallel printer cable, which has a DB-25 connector to connect to the 
computer and also a 36-pin Centronics connector for the connection to the printer. The maximum length of 
the parallel cable is usually limited to 10 feet. The reason for this is that the data integrity decreases, and you 
can have loss of data to the printer over a larger length.
Printer

Impact Printers
Ex: Dot Matrix printers [DMP]
Daisy Wheel printers
Non-impact Printers
Ex: Laser printers
Inkjet printers

Serial Port
The serial printer interface sends the data to the printer one bit at a time. This interface needs to be 
configured to the serial communication parameters including baud rate, parity bit, or start and stop bits. 
Serial printers are very rarely used these days, however sometimes dot matrix printers use this interface.

Universal Serial Bus (USB)
The USB port is the most common type of port available on most pc’s today. This is why it makes a great 
printer interface used on small and medium sized printers and desktop printers and scanners combo’s. (and 
many other peripherals). USB is much faster than most of the other types of printer interfaces. A USB printer 
comes with Plug and play compatibility and can be automatically detected and configured by your operating 
system.

Network Port
Today most high end printers, and even some of the more basic ones, come with a built-in network adapter 
or can also have one fitted into them. Network printers are directly attached to one of the free network 
ports on a hub, or a router, and are assigned a network identification such as an IP address. The printer uses 
a standard network cable with an RJ-45 connector. Sometimes in a larger company, they will use a pc that is 
directly connected to the printer as a printer queue manger.

Wireless
Today, one of the more popular interfaces for connections of printers is the wireless connections that 
support 802.11, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi. The main advantage of a wireless connections is that both the 
computer and the printer can be moved around, and obviously there are no wires. The disadvantage is that 
there is a limit to the range of the network coverage. They can also be prone to interfaces from other 
electrical sources, and the reason that most wireless printers are slow, is that the data is usually error 
checked vigorously.
