Hardware Components of Computer System

INPUT DEVICE

In computer input unit is defined as an input device, a piece of 
computer hardware apparatus used to supply a data processing 
system including a computer or information device with control and 
data signals.
Ex: Mouse, keyboards, scanners, joysticks, and digital cameras.
Several types of input devices are available to enter raw data into a 
computer. Each device has its own functions, benefits, and drawbacks, but there are some devices which are 
most commonly used in all computer systems and they are as follows.

Keyboard

A computer keyboard is an input device used to enter characters and functions into the computer system by 
pressing buttons, or keys. It is the primary device used to enter text. A keyboard typically contains keys for 
individual letters, numbers and special characters, as well as keys for specific functions. 
Most keyboards have a very similar layout. The individual keys for letters, numbers and special characters are 
collectively called the character keys. The layout of these keys is derived from the original layout of keys on a 
typewriter. The most widely used layout in the English language is called QWERTY, named after the sequence 
of the first six letters from the top left.
Other sets of keys common to almost all keyboards are entering and editing keys (e.g., Enter, Delete, Insert), 
modifier keys (e.g., Control, Shift), navigation keys (e.g., arrows for up, down, left, right) and lock keys (e.g., 
Caps Lock). Additional keys are very operating system specific (such as the Windows and Apple keys). 
Most keyboards also include a set of function keys at the top (F1, F2, etc.). The function keys typically perform 
a very specific task within a particular software application. So, what they do may depend on what you are 
doing on your computer at the time. 
Most keyboards for desktop computers also contain a separate numeric keypad to the right. Even though 
there are numeric keys already in a row near the top, having them all close together makes it faster to enter 
numeric data. On smaller keyboards, like those on most laptops, these numeric keypads are typically no longer 
present due to space constraints.
Construction & working of a keyboard
A keyboard is called as a keyboard because it is a board with a number of keys systematically arranged. A 
keyboard itself works like a computer system. It will have its own controller, a circuit, and rom. Keyboard has 
a key matrix which is a group of circuits, joined together forming a matrix, this grid of circuits is spread inside 
the keyboard. This circuit carries information to and from processor, in the form of charge.
A keyboard matrix is a set of lines arranged in 
row & column. A key or a switch is placed at the 
junction of each row & column. When a key is 
pressed, circuit is completed and a small 
amount of current flows. The processor senses 
which key is pressed and maps the location of 
key and a code is generated based on 
information in ROM. This code is sent to CPU 
for further processing.

Types of keyboard
Based on the construction, facility available and how they are connected we have different types of keyboard
A. Based on the conductive material used.

1. Mechanical Keyboards.
Mechanical keyboards are computer keyboards that have switches under each key 
and these keys are mounted on a PCB. 

2. Membrane Keyboards.
These keyboards use pressure pads and have characters printed on a flexible 
surface called membrane.

3. Flexible Keyboards
The keyboards made of silicone which has most of the keys and flexible in appearance 
is called a flexible keyboard. The distance between the keys are less. The keyboards 
are meant for rolling and are not foldable.

4. Projection Keyboards
The latest trend in handy gadgets is the projection keyboard. In some ways, a 
projection keyboard is a form of a virtual keyboard usable almost anywhere. 
The technology depends on lasers to display the image of a keyboard onto any 
flat hard surface.

5. Virtual Keyboard
The keyboard used in smartphones is called a virtual keyboard. This keyboard 
appears when needed and disappears when typing is completed. This can be 
automatically set as per need. Also in the windows system, we can use a virtual 
keyboard that appears on the screen. There is no physical object to carry for a 
virtual keyboard.

B. Based on the facility available.

1. Standard Keyboard
This is the current 101 to 102-key keyboard that is 
included in almost all the personal computers (PCs) of 
nowadays, which has 12 function keys at the top side of it.

2. Multimedia Keyboard.
A multimedia keyboard are just regular keyboards with media keys — additional 
buttons, typically along the top, for controlling audio playback, for starting common 
applications

3. Internet Keyboard.
A computer keyboard that contains buttons for common Internet 
functions such as launching the Web browser and email applications

C. Based on how keyboard is connected.
Keyboards can be categorized into two main categories based on input method. These categories are:
 Wired keyboards
 Wireless keyboards
Wired Keyboards
A wired keyboard means there is a wire connecting your keyboard to your computer. At the end of the wire 
is a Connector plug that goes into a port on your computer. Wired keyboards are extremely reliable—there 
is little that could go wrong with this direct connection.
The one drawback to having a wired keyboard is that your distance is limited between the keyboard and 
your computer; you can only have your keyboard as far from your desktop or laptop as the wire length. Also, 
wires can clutter your desktop.
Keyboard Connectors
When a Key on a keyboard is pressed then the chip in the keyboard examines the matrix and decides what 
data to send into the PC. It preserves these figures in its memory buffer then sends the information. To send 
these information to the PC Keyboard cables may utilize any one of a variety of 
connector types.

1. Deutsche Industry Norm (DIN) connector.
The 5-pin DIN connector has been the very first prevalent non-proprietary 
keyboard cable connector. It ended up being a little larger than the current 
connectors, also had five hooks that were oriented asymmetrically to 
guarantee a suitable connection. This connector can be known as an AT connector, even speaking to 
this IBM system which popularized the structure. Now, these connectors aren't widely used.

2. 6-Pin Mini-DIN (PS/2 connector).
The 6-pin mini-DIN connector is a replacement for the original 5-Pin design. This 
connector is smaller, and is typically colored purple to differentiate it from the 
similar mouse connector. This type of connector is often referred to as a PS/2 
connector and is also named for the IBM system that popularized it. This format is 
widely used in desktop computers.

3. Universal Serial Bus (USB) connectors. 
USB is one of the keyboard cable connector types. This tiny rectangular 
connector gives a significant upgrade within the DIN connector forms. USB 
connectors are hot-swappable, which means you can plug-in or plug-out 
without turning the machine on or off. AT and PS/2 devices aren't hotswappable.
Wireless Keyboards
A wireless keyboard works just like a Cordless Phone or Headset; normally all 
wireless keyboards have a receiver plugged into the computer usually a USB
connection but today we have Bluetooth keyboards also. The receiver then sends a 
signal to your battery-powered keyboard. Keep in mind, wireless USB keyboards do 
have a limited range and some must be within the line of sight of your receiver, depending on the type of 
signal it uses. Also, if your cordless keyboard starts acting sluggish, it probably requires new batteries.
Wireless keyboards present a specific benefit to the consumer. First, wireless USB keyboards reduce wireclutter on your desk. Also, you aren’t tied to your desk.

Mouse
A computer mouse is a hand-held pointing device that detects two-dimensional motion relative to a surface. 
This motion is typically translated into the motion of a pointer on a display, which allows a smooth control of 
the graphical user interface of a computer.
Equipped with one or more buttons, it can be used to –

1. Select - A mouse also allows you to select text or a file or highlight and select multiple files at once.

2. Open or execute a program - Once you've moved the pointer to an icon, folder, or another object 
clicking or double-clicking that object opens the document or executes the program.

3. Drag-and-drop - Once something is selected, it can also be moved using the drag-and-drop method.

4. Hover - Moving the mouse cursor over objects with hover information helps discover each object's 
function. For example, hover the mouse over the "hover" link to see an example.

5. Scroll - When working with a long document or viewing a long web page, you may need to scroll up or 
down. To scroll, use the mouse wheel, or click-and-drag the scroll bar.

6. Perform other functions - Many desktop mice also have buttons that can be programmed to perform 
any function. For example, many mice have two side buttons on the thumb portion of the mouse. The 
button closest to the palm can be programmed to go back to the previously viewed web page in a 
browser.

Types of computer mouse
Based on the technology how the movement of mouse is sensed there are different types of mouse devices. 
Since we use computers for different type and amount of work the technology has gifted us different types 
of mouse devices to work with. Here is a list of computer mouse devices.

1. Mechanical Mouse:
Also known as the ball mouse, this is the first type of mouse used 
during computer operating. It comes with a metal or rubber ball 
used to scroll down the page. The ball when rolled is detected by 
the sensors of the mouse, and thus the pointer is directed to move 
accordingly. The advantage of using a mechanical mouse is that it 
can work even on a glass surface while the disadvantage is that it 
cannot work on super smooth surfaces. Also, a mechanical mouse needs to be cleaned regularly in 
order to maintain the smooth functioning of the computer system.

2. Optical mouse:
An optical mouse, unlike the previously discussed ones, does not contain a 
ball. It uses a LED and a light detector which senses the movement relative 
to the surface. This mouse was invented by Richard Francis Lyon in the 
year 1980 in the United States. Earlier, the optical mouse was used on preprinted mousepad surface but as if now they work on almost all opaque 
surfaces and not on some glass surface. Also, since it has an optical light, 
there isn’t any fear of mechanical failure or dirt accumulation. The 
movement and efficiency of the mouse depends on the type of surface 
you are using. A smooth surface provides more efficiency to the device. A 
major drawback of the device is that the optical light can be damaged by 
the rough surfaces.

3. Trackball mouse:
This type of pointing device has a ball as the name suggests. The ball is held by a socket, and the 
socket senses the rotation of the ball. Also, two buttons are placed in order to allow effective 
pointing. The usage of this mouse does not allow a whole movement and just the palm of thumb. 
The user can control the system by using his fingers or the palm. It has 
been specially designed to provide an easy and hassle-free movement to 
the user. Also, it is somewhat similar to the mechanical mouse except for 
the fact that it is not movable but stationary. The trackball mouse is a 
disable friendly mouse and can be easily used by persons with disability 
due to its strategic component positioning. A trackball mouse is used for 
gaming and programming purpose.

4. Joystick Mouse (Pointing Stick):
Mostly this typed of mouse uses for playing video game and graphic 
applications. Joystick is like as plastic stick for reporting its directions to 
component it’s controlling.

5. Touchpad Mouse:
Touchpad is also known as Glide pad or track pad, use for giving the input 
to computer. These types of touch pad are place on the laptop or other 
special keyboards. Users can move the cursor on the screen with their 
fingers, and other two external buttons are embedded below track pad.
Mouse Connectors
It is a dedicated socket used to transmit their input from mouse to the computer system.

1. Serial Connector.
A serial port is a physical communication interface which is a D-type 9 pin 
connector through which a mouse is connected to a computer.

2. 6-Pin Mini-DIN (PS/2 connector).
The PS/2 mouse is connected to the PS/2 port (green in color). The PS/2 
mouse connector is a 6-pin mini-din connector designed in 1987. It 
superseded the serial connectors. Its name is derived from IBM's personal 
systems/2 series of personal computers, which were introduced in 1987.

3. USB Connector.
The industry-standard USB (Universal Serial Bus) protocol and its connector have 
become widely used for mice; it’s currently among the most popular types.
Cordless or wireless
Cordless or wireless mice transmit data via infrared radiation or radio (including Bluetooth). The receiver is 
connected to the computer through a serial or USB port, or can be built in (as is sometimes the case with 
Bluetooth). Modern non-Bluetooth wireless mice use USB receivers. Some of these can be stored inside the 
mouse for safe transport while not in use, while other, newer mice use newer “nano” receivers, designed to 
be small enough to remain plugged into a laptop during transport, while still being large enough to easily 
remove.
