Introduction to Computers
Being a modern-day kid you must have used, seen, or read about computers. This is because they are an 
integral part of our everyday existence. Be it school, banks, shops, railway stations, hospital or your own 
home, computers are present everywhere, making our work easier and faster for us. As they are such 
integral parts of our lives, we must know what they are and how they function. Let us start with defining the 
term computer formally.

The literal meaning of computer is a device that can calculate. However, modern computers can do a lot 
more than calculate. 

A Computer is a programmable fast calculating electronic device works according to the user’s requirements.
It receives input, stores or processes the input as per user instructions and provides output in desired 
format.

Components of Computer 
A computer can basically do 3 operations,
Basic building block of a computer system are
Basically any computer system contains 3 basic components / units

Input Unit:
In computing, an input unit is a piece of equipment used to provide data and control signals to a Central 
processing system (CPU). 
Ex: Keyboard, Mouse, Scanner, cameras, joysticks, Microphone ……. Etc.

Output Unit:
An output unit is any piece of equipment which converts information from the CPU into human readable 
form. It can be text, graphics, tactile, audio, and video. 
Ex: Monitor, Printer, Speaker, Headphones, and Projector ….. Etc. 

Central processing unit (CPU):
A central processing unit (CPU), also called a central processor, main processor or just processor, is the 
electronic circuitry that executes instructions comprising a computer program. The CPU performs basic 
arithmetic & logic operations, controlling, and input/output (I/O) operations specified by the instructions in 
the program. This contrasts with external components such as main memory and I/O circuitry, and 
specialized processors such as graphics processing units (GPUs).

Fetch: Getting, reading, or moving data 
Execute : Processing of Data 
Result : The processed 
information from 
Central Processing Unit [CPU]
Input Unit Arithmetic 
and Logic 
Unit [ALU]
Memory Unit [MU]
Output Unit Control Unit 
[CU]

Types of Computer :

All the computers that are developed are not alike rather they have different designs and features. Some 
computers have very high capacity as well as working speed; however, some are slow. Depending upon the 
requirements, computers are being developed. Computers can be generally classified by size and power as 
follows, though there is considerable overlap: 

1.Supercomputer: Supercomputer is a board term for one of the fastest 
computer currently available. Supercomputers are employed for specialized 
application that requires immense amounts of mathematical calculations.
2. Mainframe: Mainframe computers are powerful computers used primarily by 
corporate and governmental organizations for critical applications, bulk data 
processing such as census. In some ways, mainframes are more power than 
supercomputers because they support more simultaneous programs.
3. Minicomputer: It is a mid-size computer. In general, a minicomputer is a 
multiprocessing system capable of supporting from up to 200 users simultaneously.
4. Micro Computers (Personal computer): A personal computer can be 
defined as a small, relatively inexpensive computer designed for an 
individual user.
Computer Hardware and Software
Every computer is composed of two basic components: Hardware and Software.
Hardware
Hardware includes the Physical features, which are every part that you can either see or touch, for example: 
Monitor, Case, Keyboard, Mouse, and Printer.
There are four main computer hardware components: input devices, processing devices, output devices and 
memory (storage) devices. Collectively, these hardware components make up the computer system
Input Devices
Input devices comprise of any devices that users need in order to give instructions to a computer. 
Essentially input devices act as the medium for sending data to a computer so that users can interact 
Computer Components
Hardware
Input Devices Output Devices Processing 
Devices
Memory 
(Storage) 
Devices
Software
System 
Software
Application 
Software
Programming 
Software
with and control it. The most widely known examples are the keyboard and mouse. Input devices are 
also used to transfer data between computers.
Output Devices
Output devices are devices that allow computers to send data to other devices or to users. In 
general, the data that computers send to human users is in forms that we can understand. Most 
often, these forms include audio and video. The most widely known examples of output devices are 
monitors, speakers and printers. These devices produce video, audio and graphic output, 
respectively.
Processing Devices
Processing is the core function of any computer. When a computer receives data from an input 
device, this data must first go through an intermediate stage before it is sent to an output device. 
Processing is the intermediate stage where raw data is transformed into information so that it can 
be outputted meaningfully for the user. An example of a processing device is the central processing 
unit (CPU), which is a set of electronic circuitry that processes and executes instructions
Memory (Storage) Devices
Memory devices are any devices that are capable of storing information temporarily or permanently. 
Software
The part which activates the physical components called Software. It includes the features that responsible 
for directing the work to the hardware. Software can be divided into other programs and data.
There are three main computer Software components: System Software, Application and utility Software, 
and Programming Software
System Software
In case of a system software, it helps the user as well as the hardware to function and even interact 
with each other easily. Essentially, it is a software which is used to manage the behavior of the 
computer hardware in order to offer basic functionalities which are needed by the user. In simpler 
word, it can be said that system software is very essential for a computer system to start and work. 
It is designed to run a computer's hardware and application programs.
Ex. Operating System, Compilers, Interpreter, Assemblers, Device Drivers, Firmware etc.
Application Software
They are also popularly known as end-user programs or even productivity programs which assist the 
user in completing various tasks like conducting online research, making notes, designing graphics, 
maintaining accounts, carrying out calculations or even playing computer games. They essentially lie 
above the system software. They are actually used by the end-user as well as have specific 
functionality or tasks which they are designed to perform. These software are often developed 
through custom software development, based on the requirements of the users. There is a variety of 
application software. Some of them are:
Ex. Microsoft Office, Photo Editors, Web Browsers, Adobe Reader, WinZip etc.
Programming Software
Programming software is for computer programmers and developers who are writing code. These 
are programs that are used to write, develop, test, and debug other software programs. Using this 
software the application software is designed for end-users, and system software is designed for 
computers or mobile devices.
Ex. C, C++, Java, Oracle, Visual Studio Etc.
