Removable storage
In secondary memory, removable storage is an external media device that is used to store data in a 
computer system. Removable storage is generally known as disks drives or external drives. It is a 
storage device that can be inserted or removed from the computer according to our requirements. 
We can easily remove them from the computer system while the computer system is running. 
Removable storage devices are portable so we can easily transfer data from one computer to 
another. Also, removable storage devices provide the fast data transfer rates associated with 
storage area networks (SANs).
Types of Removable Storage:
  Floppy disks
  Optical discs (like CDs, DVDs, Blu-ray discs, etc.)
  Flash Drive 
  Memory cards
  Magnetic tapes
  Disk packs
  Paper storage (like punched tapes, punched cards, etc.)
Following are the commonly used Removable Storage Devices:
Floppy Disk:
A floppy disk consists of a magnetic disc in a square plastic case. It is used to store data and 
to transfer data from one device to another device. Floppy disks are available in two sizes (a) 
Size: 3.5 inches, the Storage capacity of 1.44 MB (b) Size: 5.25 inches, the Storage capacity of 
1.2 MB. To use a floppy disk, our computer needs to have a floppy disk drive. This storage 
device becomes obsolete now and has been replaced by CDs, DVDs, and flash drives.
Optical discs (like CDs, DVDs, Blu-ray discs, etc.)
Optical memory is an electronic storage medium that uses a laser beam to store and retrieve 
the data. Some of the Optical memories are.
Compact Disc: A Compact Disc (CD) is a commonly used secondary storage device. It 
contains tracks and sectors on its surface. Its shape is circular and is made up of 
polycarbonate plastic. The storage capacity of CD is up to 700 MB of data.
Digital Versatile Disc: A Digital Versatile Disc also known as DVD it is looks just like a CD, but 
the storage capacity is greater compared to CD, it stores up to 4.7 GB of data.
Blu-ray Disc: A Blu-ray disc looks just like a CD or a DVD but it can store data or information 
up to 25 GB data. If you want to use a Blu-ray disc, you need a Blu-ray reader. The name Bluray is derived from the technology that is used to read the disc ‘Blu’ from the blue-violet 
laser and ‘ray’ from an optical ray.
Flash Drive: 
A flash drive or pen drive comes in various storage capacities, such as 1 GB, 2 GB, 4 GB, 8 GB, 
16 GB, 32 GB, 64 GB, up to 1 TB. A flash drive is used to transfer and store data. To use a 
flash drive, we need to plug it into a USB port on a computer. As a flash drive is easy to use 
and compact in size, Nowadays it is very popular.
Memory cards
It is also known as a Secure Digital Card (SD Card). It is generally used in portable devices like 
mobile phones, cameras, etc., to store data. It is available in different sizes like 1 GB, 2 GB, 4 
GB, 8 GB, 16 GB, 32 GB, 64 GB, etc. To view the data stored in the SD card you can remove 
them from the device and insert them into a computer with help of a card reader. The data 
stores in the SD card is stored in memory chips (present in the SD Card) and it does not 
contain any moving parts like the hard disk.
Magnetic Tape memory:
In magnetic tape only one side of the ribbon is used for storing data. It is sequential memory 
which contains thin plastic ribbon to store data and coated by magnetic oxide. Data 
read/write speed is slower because of sequential access. It is highly reliable which requires 
magnetic tape drive writing and reading data.
